
3
 
 
 
Sexism Identification  
Annotation Guidelines 
Description 
The  Oxford  English  Dictionary  defines  sexism  as  “prejudice,  stereotyping  or  discrimination, 
typically against women, on the basis of sex”.  In  general,  sexist  behaviors  and  discourses 
underestimate the role of women. Inequality and discrimination against women that remains 
embedded in society is increasingly being replicated online.  
However, detecting online sexism may be difficult, as it may be expressed in very different forms. 
Sexism may sound “friendly”: the statement “Women must be loved and respected, always treat 
them like a fragile glass” may seem positive, but is actually considering that women are weaker 
than men. Sexism may sound “funny”, as it is the case of sexist jokes or humor (“You have to love 
women... just that... You will never understand them.”).  Sexism  may  sound  “offensive”  and 
“hateful”, as in “Humiliate, expose and degrade yourself as the fucking bitch you are if you want 
a real man to give you attention”. However, even the most subtle forms of sexism can be as 
pernicious as the most violent ones and affect women in many facets of their lives, including 
domestic and parenting roles, career opportunities, sexual image, and life expectations, to name 
a few.  
Objectives 
The aim of this work is to annotate tweets with a set of labels, specified below, that indicate 
whether the message is sexist or not, and (if so) what kind of sexism it encloses and the intention 
of the author of the message when he/she wrote it. 
Warnings:  
You will be asked to read potentially sexist and hateful messages. If this may cause you distress, 
please do not continue with the task. 
The task is estimated to last half an hour. The work done is not saved and submitted until it is 
finished. Thus, we strongly recommend doing it at once, without interruptions, to avoid losing 
information and having to start over. Once the “Submit” button is pressed, you will not be able to 
modify or complete your answers. Remember that the work must be completed to be accepted 
and paid. 
 
Guidelines 
You will be shown 60 tweets, one by one. You must read each tweet carefully to answer the following 
question: 
1. Is the tweet sexist, in any form, or does it describe situations in 
which such discrimination occurs (i.e., it is sexist itself, describes 
a sexist situation or criticizes a sexist behaviour)? 
           
●  YES, the tweet is sexist itself, describes a sexist situation or criticizes a sexist behavior. 
Examples of tweets in this category are: 
○  “It’s less of #adaywithoutwomen and more of a day without feminists, which, to be 
quite honest, sounds lovely.”. 
○  “I’m sorry but women cannot drive, call me sexist or whatever but it is true.”. 
○  “You look like a whore in those pants" - My brother of 13 when he saw me in a 
leather pant”. 
 
●  NO, the tweet does not prejudice, underestimate or discriminate women. Examples of 
tweets in this category are:  
○  “Where all the white women at?”. 
○  “The shocking video of a woman at the wheel who miraculously escapes an 
assassination attempt” 
○  “Don’t my arguments convince you? Let’s try to debate. Do you use "feminazi"? 
You stay alone.”. 
 
IMPORTANT NOTE: Remember that sexism may be expressed in different forms! It may sound 
friendly, funny, offensive, hateful or even violent. Sexism comprises any form of oppression or 
prejudice against women because of their sex. This discrimination can be based on different 
beliefs such as stereotypes, the belief that men are superior to women or irrational hatred of 
women (misogyny). Note that misogyny is a radical/hate-driven sexism. 
 
If the answer to the previous question was YES, the two following questions must be answered: 
2. What do you think the intention of the person that wrote the tweet 
is? 
 
●  DIRECT: The intention is to write a message that is sexist by itself, as in: 
o  “A woman needs love, to fill the fridge, if a man can give this to her in return for her 
services (housework, cooking, etc), I don’t see what else she needs“. 
 
●  REPORTED: The intention of the author is to report or describe a sexist situation or event 
suffered by a woman or women in first or third person, as in: 
o  “I doze in the subway, I open my eyes feeling something weird: the hand of the 
man sat next to me on my leg #SquealOnYourPig”.  
 
●  JUDGEMENTAL  The  intention  of  the  author  is  to  be  judgemental,  since  the  tweet 
describes sexist situations or behaviors with the aim to condemning them. 
o  “As usual, the woman was the one quitting her job for the family’s welfare”. 
 
3. What type of sexism does the tweet enclose? 
Sexism may affect women in many facets of their lives, including domestic and parenting roles, 
career opportunities, sexual image and life expectations, to name a few. According to this, the 
tweet must be categorized in one or more of the following categories: 
 
●  Ideological  discredit,  denying  inequality  and  flipped  narrative  (IDEOLOGICAL-
INEQUALITY):  this  category  includes  all  tweets  or  gabs  that  discredit  the  feminist 
movement in order to devalue, belittle and defame the struggle of women in all areas. Also 
included are messages that reject inequality between men and women, or present men 
as victims of gender-based oppression. Examples of tweets in this category are: 
○  “#Feminism is a war on men, but it's also a war on women. It's a war on female 
nature, a war on femininity.”. 
○  “I think the whole equality thing is getting out of hand. We are different, thats how 
were made!”. 
○  “OK. Whew, that’s good. Get a real degree and forget this poison of victimhood 
known as feminism”. 
 
●  Role  stereotyping  and  dominance  (STEREOTYPING-DOMINANCE):  this  category 
includes messages that express false ideas about women that suggest they are more 
suitable or inappropriate for certain tasks. It also includes any claim that implies that men 
are somehow superior to women. Examples of tweets in this category are: 
○  “Most women no longer have the desire or the knowledge to develop a high quality 
character, even if they wanted to.”. 
○  “I feel like everytime I flirt with a girl they start to imagine all the ways they can 
utilize me”. 
○  “Woman driving, be careful!”. 
 
●  Objectification and Physical stereotyping (OBJECTIFICATION):  it includes messages 
where women are presented as objects apart from their dignity and personal aspects. We 
also include messages that assume or describe certain physical qualities that women must 
have to fulfill traditional gender roles, for example, ideas that suggest that women should 
maintain a standard and ideal of beauty or attacks on a woman's physique. Examples of 
tweets in this category are: 
○  “No offense but I've never seen an attractive african american hooker. Not a 
single one”. 
○  “Most of the times I just want women for sex just because everytime I try to make 
a relationship out of it they always break my heart”. 
○  “Don't get married than blame all woman for your poor investment. You should of 
got a hooker but instead you choose to go get a wedding ring.”. 
 
●  Sexual violence (SEXUAL-VIOLENCE): this category includes messages where sexual 
suggestions, requests for sexual favors or harassment of a sexual nature (rape or sexual 
assault) are made. Examples of tweets in this category are: 
○  “I wanna touch your tits..you can't imagine what I can do on your body.”. 
○  “fuck that cunt, I would with my fist”. 
○  “Now I understand why woman that get no action are miserable. Semen retention 
almost drove me insane”. 
 
●  Misogyny  and  violence  (MISOGYNY-NON-SEXUAL-VIOLENCE):  this  category 
includes expressions of hatred and violence towards women. Examples of tweets in this 
category are: 
○  “Domestic abuse is never okay.... Unless your wife is a bitch” 
○  “Some woman are so toxic they don't even know they are draining everyone 
around them in poison. If you lack self awareness you won't even notice how toxic 
you really are”. 
○  “Regardless, if you grab a woman by the throat, you’re a massive cunt”. 
 
 